Add guideline for adding new algorithm (#85)
modelscope/Trinity-RFT: docs/sphinx_doc/source/tutorial/trinity_programming_guide.md

# Developer Guide

> This guide introduces how to develop new modules to Trinity-RFT and provides relevant development guidelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide introduces how to develop new modules in Trinity-RFT and provides relevant development guidelines.
```

Trinity-RFT consists of three main modules: **Explorer**, **Trainer** and **Buffer**.
We decouple the RL pipeline into three modules to make it easier to customize and extend.
Below is a table summarizing the modules that different types of developers need to focus on.

> | Developer Type | Focus Module | Key Component |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Development Target | Core Module | Key Component |
```

|----------------|--------------|---------------|

> | Extend existing RL algorithms to new environments. | *Explorer* | `Workflow` |
> | Design new RL algorithms for higher model performance. | *Trainer* | `Algorithm` |
> | Enhance model performance from the data perspective. | *Buffer* | Data Processing Module (Coming soon) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Apply existing RL algorithms to new environments. | *Explorer* | `Workflow` |
| Design new RL algorithms. | *Trainer* | `Algorithm` |
| Enhance the RL process from the data perspective. | *Buffer* | Data Processing Module (Coming soon) |
```

```{note}
Trinity-RFT is still under development, and the following interfaces may change. Please read this section in conjunction with the latest code.
```

---

## Workflows (For RL Environment Developers)

In Trinity-RFT, workflows are the core components that define the interaction between Agents and Environments.
A qualified workflow needs to use the trained model to complete the specified task and obtain feedback information (reward) from the environment. Below are the steps to create a new workflow:

---

### Step 0: Basic Concepts

Before starting development, it's important to understand several core concepts:

- **Task** ({class}`trinity.common.workflows.Task`): Represents a data structure that can be converted into a `Workflow`. The content of the `Task` varies depending on the task type:
  - **Math problems**: A `Task` contains the problem description and the golden answer.
  - **Programming scenarios**: A `Task` includes the problem description, test cases, runtime environment, and other complex information.

> - **Workflow** ({class}`trinity.common.workflows.Workflow`): Can be understood as the running state of a `Task`. It defines the interaction flow between Agents and Environments, including logic similar to *Rollout* and *Reward* calculations in other frameworks. After execution, it generates a list of `Experience`. Trinity-RFT includes several built-in workflows:

Reviewer: "Can be understood as the running state of a `Task`." I cannot understand this definition clearly. One suggestion is:

Describes how a `Task` is executed.

The task dataset is loaded via the `buffer.explorer_input.taskset` configuration entry in your YAML config file.
To handle differences in `Task` contents, Trinity-RFT provides a unified `Task` interface containing the following fields.

- **`workflow`** (`str`): The registered name of your workflow class. You can specify it in `buffer.explorer_input.taskset.default_workflow_type` of your YAML config file.
- **`reward_fn`** (`Optional[str]`): The registered name of your reward function. You can specify it in `buffer.explorer_input.taskset.default_reward_fn_type`. Note that some workflows already include built-in reward calculation; in such cases, you can omit this field.

> - **`raw_task`** (`Dict`): An record of raw data in `Dict` format. For highly customized workflow, you can directly use `raw_task` to initialize your `Workflow` instance without relying on the following fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`raw_task`** (`Dict`): A record of raw data in `Dict` format. For highly customized workflow, you can directly use `raw_task` to initialize your `Workflow` instance without relying on the following fields.
```

---

## Algorithms (For RL Algorithm Developers)

Trinity-RFT provides a standardized process for implementing new algorithms.

### Step 0: Basic Concepts of Algorithm Module

In Trinity-RFT, the algorithm module is primarily responsible for extracting experience data from the Replay Buffer during the RL process and calculating the loss to update models based on this data.
To avoid implementing a new Trainer class each time a new algorithm is added, we have decomposed the representative PPO algorithm process into multiple sub-modules to adapt to various algorithms.

> - **Sample Strategy**: Responsible for reading experience data from the buffer module. By customizing this module, you can implement requirements like filtering experience data or mixed sampling from multiple data sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Sample Strategy** ({class}`SampleStrategy`): Responsible for reading experience data from the buffer module. By customizing this module, you can implement requirements like filtering experience data or mixed sampling from multiple data sources.
```

> - **Sample Strategy**: Responsible for reading experience data from the buffer module. By customizing this module, you can implement requirements like filtering experience data or mixed sampling from multiple data sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Sample Strategy**: Responsible for sampling experience data from the buffer module. By customizing this module, you can implement functionalities like filtering experience data or mixed sampling from multiple data sources.
```

> - **Sample Strategy**: Responsible for reading experience data from the buffer module. By customizing this module, you can implement requirements like filtering experience data or mixed sampling from multiple data sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Sample Strategy**: Responsible for sampling experience data from the buffer module. By customizing this module, you can implement functionalities like filtering experience data or mixed sampling from multiple data sources.
```

- **Advantage Fn**: Responsible for calculating the Advantage and Returns of experience data.

> - **Policy Loss Fn**: Responsible for calculating the loss of the policy network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Policy Loss Fn**: Responsible for calculating the core training loss of the policy network.
```

- **KL Fn**: Responsible for calculating KL Divergence, which is generally used in two places in existing RL algorithms: Reward Penalty and Actor Loss.
- **Entropy Loss Fn**: Responsible for calculating the entropy loss of the policy network.

We provide several implementations of above modules in `trinity/algorithm`.

### Step 1: Implementing Algorithm Components

Trinity-RFT allows developers to customize all the above modules. Developers only need to implement specific modules according to the requirements of their new algorithm. This section will provide a simple introduction using the [OPMD](example_reasoning_advanced.md#opmd-a-native-off-policy-rl-algorithm) algorithm as an example.

The main difference between OPMD and PPO algorithms lies in the calculation of Advantage and Policy Loss. Therefore, only new Advantage Fn and Policy Loss Fn modules need to be implemented.

---

#### Step 1.1: Implementing `AdvantageFn`

Developers need to implement the {class}`trinity.algorithm.AdvantageFn` interface, which mainly includes two methods:

> - `__call__`: Calculates advantages and returns based on input experience data, records observable metrics during the calculation process, and returns the experience data containing advantages and returns as well as a metrics dictionary. The input experience data format is `verl`'s `DataProto`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `__call__`: Calculates advantages and returns based on input experience data, records observable metrics during the calculation process, and returns the experience data containing advantages and returns as well as a metrics dictionary. The input experience data format is verl's `DataProto`.
```

        action_mask: torch.Tensor,
        advantages: torch.Tensor,
        **kwargs,
    ) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor, Dict]:
        pg_losses = -advantages * logprob
        opmd_loss = masked_mean(pg_losses, action_mask)
        opmd_loss = opmd_loss / (1.0 + self.tau)  # for regularization (w.r.t. current pi_theta)
        return opmd_loss, {"opmd_loss": opmd_loss.detach().item()}

    @classmethod
    def default_args(cls) -> Dict:
        return {"tau": 1.0}
```

---

### Step 2: Register Your Algorithm

The above steps implement the components needed for the algorithm, but these components are scattered and need to be configured in multiple places to take effect.

To simplify configuration, Trinity-RFT provides {class}`trinity.algorithm.AlgorithmType` to describe a complete algorithm and registers it in {object}`trinity.algorithm.ALGORITHM_TYPE`, enabling one-click configuration.

The `AlgorithmType` class includes the following attributes and methods:

- `use_critic`: Whether to use the Critic model
- `use_reference`: Whether to use the Reference model
- `use_advantage`: Whether to calculate Advantage; if False, the `AdvantageFn` call will be skipped

> - `can_balance_batch`: Whether the algorithm can automatically balance batches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `can_balance_batch`: Whether the algorithm allows automatic balancing when splitting a batch into microbatches (which permute the order of samples)
```
